Source URL: https://www.depositprotection.com/news/latest-news/2022/did-you-know-using-one-deposit-protection-provider-can-save-you-time-and-money
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
---

Do you protect your deposits with more than one scheme? Use our surprisingly easy deposit protection for all your deposits and The DPS will do the heavy lifting, lightening your workload.

Streamline administration – Why use multiple systems requiring additional knowledge and training for your staff? Our simple, online solution streamlines your administration, helping you stay organised and more efficient with your deposit protection tasks.
Store all your data in one place – Compiling data from several systems can be time-consuming and prone to errors. When you choose The DPS, you’ll have a single source of information, and you won’t have to spend valuable time tracking down and verifying data.
Alleviate audit and compliance risks – With easy access to all your important deposit data and documentation, you’ll have confidence your information is accurate, and you can be sure to never miss your critical deadlines.

Whether you’re ready to switch all your deposits to one provider now or are waiting until your tenancies renew, you can take advantage of The DPS benefits, plus:

Top-rated customer service – Top rated on Trustpilot with over 4,000 reviews from customers like you.
Free training – We’ve trained over 5,500 letting agents and landlords since June 2020 through our dispute webinars.
All the support you need – A library of helpful articles, videos and other tools to keep your tenancies and deposits on track.
Regular industry updates – Get the latest news and guidance about deposit protection.

Choose Custodial or Insured Deposit Protection
The DPS is authorised by the Government to provide two types of deposit protection, custodial and insured. When you move all your deposits to The DPS you can choose the scheme that’s right for you. Here’s an overview to help you decide.



 
Custodial
Insured




What does it cost?
Nothing, it's totally free
A small fee per deposit protected.



How does it work


It’s all online.
You:
Add the tenancy and give us the deposit.
We:
Keep the deposit safe.
Inform the tenant it’s protected.
Automatically create the Prescribed Information documents for you to send to your tenant, helping you stay on top of your legal obligations.
Take care of the deposit repayment and administration on your behalf when instructed.


You:
Hold the deposit.
Arrange for safe storage.
Provide the tenant with the Prescribed Information documents.
Handle all deposit repayment administration at the end of the tenancy.
We:
Inform the tenant it’s protected.




I have lots of deposits to protect and the administration is time consuming.


We can help you with that. You can protect deposits for multiple tenancies with our bulk upload tool.
You can also request deposit repayment for multiple deposits, significantly reducing your administration.
Large agencies may also benefit from additional dedicated managed support to resolve issues and address other queries


If you’re protecting over 100 deposits at one time, contact business@depositprotection.com to discuss a volume discount.




Some schemes charge yearly membership or renewal fees, do you?


No.
It’s totally free, no need to worry about additional annual costs.


No.
You only pay the initial protection fee which covers the deposit for the lifetime of the tenancy, and there are no fee increases based on the number of disputes.





Making the move to a single provider is surprisingly easy with The DPS. Join us today.