Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/eviction/legal_aid_and_free_legal_advice/possession_hearing
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Fri Sep 06 2024
---

Try to get legal advice before you go to a possession hearing.A solicitor or adviser can discuss your case with you and come to court with you. What you need to doTry to call the scheme before to find out exactly what to do on the day.The scheme's contact details should be on your court paperwork.You can also ask for a duty adviser at the court reception on the day.Get to the court at least 30 minutes early so you have time to speak to an adviser. You may have to wait to see them.Bring all your paperworkThis helps the adviser to understand your situation quickly so they can give the best advice.The adviser will you ask about your situation and can speak to your landlord or lender's representatives. They can also go into the hearing and speak to the judge for you.If you have rent or mortgage arrears, the adviser could help you with a plan to repay this over time. They could speak to your landlord or lender about this before you go in.If no adviser is availableThere will usually be someone available. You might not be able to speak to an adviser if:there is staff sicknessthe adviser is helping someone elseYou should still go into the hearing when your name is called.You could ask the judge to move the hearing to another time if you have not been able to get legal advice. This is called an 'adjournment'. The judge decides what to do.What happens in the hearingA judge could suspend a possession order or eviction warrant in some situations.This means you can stay in your home as long as you stick to conditions set by the court. For example, a suspended possession order might say that you have to:pay your full rent or mortgage each monthrepay your arrears in monthly instalments that you can affordThe adviser could ask the judge to stop or dismiss your case if your landlord or lender:cannot prove a reason for evicting youmakes a serious mistake on the notice or the process they have followedAsking for the hearing to be moved to another timeThe adviser might ask to change your hearing date. For example, to give you time to:get more legal advicesort out an issue with benefitsget your wages if you start a new job soonAfter the hearingThe adviser explains the court's decision and your next steps.They may also tell you about other organisations who could help with:debt support benefits adviceThe duty adviser will confirm your advice in a letter.