Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/homelessness/help_if_youre_homeless_ex_prisoners
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Tue Jul 22 2025
---

The prison or probation service must refer you to a council's homeless team if you're:homeless now or likely to be homeless in the next 8 weeksbeing released in the next 8 weeks with nowhere suitable to staystaying in probation or bail accommodation with nowhere to go nextThey need your permission to do this. You can also ask the council for homeless help yourself. This is called making a homeless application.If you qualify for release on bail or a tagYou need somewhere to stay before you can be released on bail or an electronic tag.Court or prison staff may refer you to the Community Accommodation Service (CAS) run by the charity NACRO if you have nowhere suitable to live.Homeless applications before you leave prisonAsk the prison to refer you to a council homeless team 8 weeks before your release.The council must look at your housing needs and give you a personal housing plan. The homeless team should speak to people who are supporting you. For example, probation, youth offending team or drug and alcohol services.Homeless applications after leaving prisonYou can ask any council for help but you might be referred to a different council if you have a local connection there.You could have a local connection if you have, for example:close family or work in the arealived in the area for 3 out of the last 5 yearslived in the area for 6 out of the last 12 months  Being in prison does not count as a local connection. Find out about local connection rules.Who gets emergency housing?Not everyone gets emergency housing when they make a homeless application.The council must provide emergency housing if they think you may:be homelesshave a priority needmeet the immigration conditionsYou always have a priority need if you're:homeless because of domestic abusea care leaver under 21pregnant or have dependent children with you.You might also have a priority need for other reasons, for example because of a serious physical or mental health condition. The council should look at:how long you spent in prison and when you were releasedif you have found and kept a home since you left prisonWhat the probation service can doProbation teams may be able to refer you to hostels, supported housing or private landlords.If you're released on licence, you might not be able to live in certain areas or you might have to stay in 'approved premises'.Homeless hostelsFind out more about hostels if you're homeless. Help with money and travel On the day of release, most prisoners get:a travel warrant or ticketsan £89.52 cash payment - often called a subsistence payment  You must have spent at least 2 weeks as a sentenced prisoner to get these. Prison governors can also make a discretionary payment of up to £50 direct to a housing provider if this will give you somewhere to stay on release.    Benefits to help with rent and other costsYou may need to apply for universal credit when you're released from prison to help with living costs. Universal credit includes a housing element to help with rent.If you move in with a partner who gets benefits, you need to claim benefits as a couple.You will probably have to claim housing benefit to help with rent if you stay in a hostel, supported or temporary housing on release. You can still get universal credit to help with other living costs. Read our advice on how to find a private landlord if you get benefits.Turn2Us have more information about benefits for prisoners and their families.If you do not have a bank accountYou may need to open a bank account so you have somewhere to get your wages and benefits paid into.Read our guide on how to open a bank account if you're homeless.Unlock have useful online information about ID for prisoners and people on release. Unlock are a charity for people with criminal records.Charities that could help