Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/eviction/help_from_the_council_with_harassment_and_illegal_eviction
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Mon Apr 22 2024
---

Tell the council if your landlord harasses you or threatens you with illegal eviction.The council might have to give you homeless help if it's not safe for you to stay where you are.The council might:talk to your landlord about your rights prosecute your landlord in serious cases tell your landlord that they are breaking the law help you get back into your home if you've been illegally evictedWhat to do before you contact the councilGet information together before you contact your council if you can.Be ready to tell them:how your landlord is harassing you times and dates of unwanted visitsyour landlord’s contact details It will be easier for the council to take action against your landlord if you have this information. Find out about how to keep a record of harassment.Contact the councilEvery council has a team that deals with harassment and illegal eviction.The team could be called something like:environmental health team private rented housing team tenancy relations officer or team Their contact details should be on your council's website.In London, you can report a rogue landlord or agent on the London Assembly website. Your local council can use these details for investigation if you give permission.Phone the councilSay you need help because your landlord is harassing you or threatening to illegally evict you.Make a note of:who you speak towhat you discussthe time and datethe number you've calledwhat your next steps should beUse an online form to contact the councilSome councils only let you contact them with an online form.  Make sure you mention:your landlord’s actionswhat specific help you wantwhy you’re at risk of illegal eviction or harassmenthow often and when the harassment has happenedKeep a record of the date and time you sent the form and any reference number you get. Use our letter templateCopy the template into an email to your council. You can also send it as an email attachment or by post:Word template: Ask for council help to stop harassment and illegal eviction (docx 16kb)OpenDocument template: Ask for  council help to stop harassment and illegal eviction (odt 8kb)Houses in multiple occupation (HMOs)Make sure you tell your council if you live in an HMO.  Most HMOs must be licensed by the council.  Landlord harassment breaks HMO rules. Your landlord might lose their HMO licence.If you cannot get through to your councilIt can be hard to get through to your council.  Keep trying.It is a good idea to:try different numbers on your council website call your council at different times of the day get in touch with your local councillor  send follow up emails   contact your local MPIf you're facing homelessnessContact your council's homeless team if you cannot stay in or return to your home because of harassment. Need more templates?