Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/tenancy_deposits/how_to_get_your_deposit_back/dispute_unfair_deductions
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
---

You can challenge deductions from your deposit if you think they are unfair.Deductions mean your landlord or letting agent keeps money from your deposit. For example, to pay to fix damage that they think you caused.Write to your landlord or agentSay that you do not agree with their reasons for keeping the money. Keep copies of any emails or letters you send and the replies. Get proof that your landlord received any letters you sent. For example, send letters by recorded delivery.Copy this template into an email to your landlord or agent.You can also download the letter template to send as an attachment or letter:Word template: Refund of deposit balance (docx 21kb)OpenDocument template: Refund of deposit balance (odt 7kb)Use your scheme's dispute resolution serviceYou can ask your deposit scheme to help if you think your landlord should not keep your money. This is called raising a dispute.  You can do this if:your deposit is protected in a schemeyour landlord or agent agrees that they will do what the scheme says Each deposit protection scheme has a free dispute resolution service. They look at evidence from you and your landlord. They decide how much of your deposit you should get back.Consider court actionYou may need to take court action to get your deposit back if: your deposit is not protectedyour landlord will not agree to dispute resolutionYou could claim compensation if your landlord breaks deposit protection rules. Your landlord might return your money to avoid court action if you have a good case.Court action takes time. You usually have to pay a fee to start a claim.Find out about:getting your deposit back through courtmaking a tenancy deposit compensation claimIf the landlord is not using the same agentYour landlord is still responsible for returning your deposit. They must do this even if the agent did not give your deposit back to your landlord.