Source URL: https://www.totallandlordinsurance.co.uk/knowledge-centre/how-to-legally-increase-rent
Scrape Date: 3 October 2025
---

Why should landlords increase their rents?Making a good return (rental yield) on your investment property is your best measure of success in the business of buy to let in the short-term. That means increasing rents from time to time. In the long-term landlords also look for growth in the value of the property.‍The changes under the Renters’ Rights Bill mean it will be more important than ever to keep rents at market levels. There will no longer be fixed-terms where new (renewed) tenancies with the same tenant can be signed and commenced with a new market rent, and there will be limited provisions for increasing the rent during a tenancy – see below for details.In an economic environment where costs are constantly increasing and when inflation is high, rents must be kept at an economic level, otherwise the venture becomes uneconomic. That means knowing how, when and by how much to increase the rent.No landlord wants to make the lives of their tenants more difficult than is necessary, but the economic reality is the rent must be set at a level that is sufficient to cover running costs, and leave a margin to make a profit, however small, to make the business of running buy-to-lets worthwhile.Mortgage rates and cost pressuresThe Bank of England made a series of 14 consecutive bank rate hikes to September 2023, though there have been a couple of reductions since. This has had a dramatic effect on the rates mortgage lenders charge. It has significantly altered the financial landscape that landlords now face and adds some urgency to the question of rent increases. That’s especially true where landlords have mortgages and/or are highly leveraged.According to one English Private Landlord Survey (2021) more than one-third (38%) of buy-to-let landlords had no mortgage or debt. So, a rent increase for them has less urgency about it, though allowing rents to fall too far below the market level is not a sensible strategy. This still leaves 62% of landlords who have mortgages with varying degrees of leverage, and there’s a probable need to regularly increase the rent for them. For more on mortgages, read our ultimate landlord guide to buy to let mortgages.How to the increase rentTo continue to maintain a viable rental business, when  running costs are rising, but rental demand is strong, landlords need to find a way of increasing rent in a fair way, and of course doing it legally. Most importantly, doing it without unsettling tenants. Understanding how to approach the situation with your tenants and prioritising good lines of communication from the outset is key to making this work.When is the best time to increase the rent?The easiest way to increase the rent is when a tenant leaves and you’re setting up a new tenancy. You can then advertise your property at the prevailing market rent, which can be arrived at through comparisons with similar properties currently letting in your location. Read our separate guide on how much rent to charge for more advice on this. Remember, under the new Renters’ Rights Bill rules the rent amount must be stated in any tenancy advertisements and there will be strict rules and heavy fines to prevent bidding up the price thereafter. See our Renters’ Rights Bill article on what’s happening with bidding wars and rent increases.With in periodic tenancy, as will be the case with all tenancies soon (rolling on a week-by-week or month-by-month basis), landlords cannot increase the rent more than once a year, unless of course the tenant agrees to that voluntarily.The only way to increase the rent legally under the new rules will be by serving a notice (Section 13 form 4) – see below.How much can a landlord increase rent by?It is worth bearing in mind that while it’s important for landlords to make good returns on the investment they’ve put into their properties, sometimes keeping a good tenant gives a better reward than increased rents.Keeping the rent level slightly below the market level will usually prevent the tenants looking elsewhere, triggering a move. The gain in extra rent therefore could be wiped out by the costs and time involved in re-letting.This is a point of contention amongst landlords and tenants, many of whom might argue about what is fair and what is not.The UK Government states that all rent increases must be “fair and realistic” and in line with the local average, but this is incredibly vague and difficult to enforce.Take nationwide statistics with a pinch of salt. While they’re useful as a basic litmus test, it’s more important to look locally before you figure out how much more you should be asking from your tenants.Look at properties similar to yours and work out what the local average is. As long as you stay within this rate then you can’t be accused of being unfair. Ask local agents who have knowledge of the local market if you’re not sure.The most important thing is to make sure that the rent renewal date is set out in the tenancy agreement and that you adhere to this process, because otherwise it can lead to disagreements and even messy and unwanted legal action.Disputes and the First-Tier TribunalIf a tenant feels that an increase in rent is unfair then they can take the dispute to a First-Tier Tribunal, where each party will be asked to plead their case to an independent jury. This is definitely not a situation you want to find yourself in. It is likely to cause an irreparable rift between you and your tenants.How to increase the rent on your rental propertyIf you feel as if you are stuck in a situation where market rent prices are soaring but there’s nothing you can do about it then don’t despair, there are options to consider.In a fixed-term contract you could negotiate an increased rent with the tenants at the end of the term, or you could speak with the tenant beforehand to agree on a rent increase and record this agreement in a written contract.This is far more likely to work in your favour if you have a decent, long standing relationship with your tenants. Tenants will generally accept more readily a small but regular increase than when rent levels are left to languish and then a large increase is demanded.What are rental increase notices and what is Section 13? The formal legal process for increasing the rentThe only other option when rent increase negotiations fail is to file a Section 13 notice. This has been seen very much as the ‘nuclear’ option since it was first instigated in 1988. This allows landlords to increase the rent even if that increase is not stated in the tenancy agreement and the tenants don’t agree to it, as long as the increase is fair and due notice is given.The landlord must give the tenant sufficient time between the giving of the notice and the increase taking effect. A notice of one month would generally be expected for periodic tenancies, and a notice of six months expected for fixed-term tenancies.Section 13 notices cannot be filed less than a year apart, and if a new tenancy is in place then the date of the increase should be no earlier than a year after the start date. When it comes to any rental increase it’s always best to think in terms of annual cycles.Can a landlord increase the rent if a tenant is on Universal Credit?Tenants in receipt of housing costs payments through Universal Credit may be able to get extra money to deal with their rent increase, but they will need to tell the housing team at the council about the increase before it starts, and provide evidence such as a letter from you, the landlord. So, make sure you give them plenty of notice and provide them with the evidence they’ll need. As with all rent increases, any increase should be fair and in line with the local market. What can landlords do if a tenant refuses to pay a rent increase?Of course, if a tenant refuses a rent increase, it might be a more sensible option to simply end their tenancy once the agreement has run its course and look for new tenants who are happy to pay the increased / market rate. It’s worth knowing that a typical residential tenant will spend nearly four years in the same property and, across the UK, homes take only a short time to let in the current climate.However, some properties will take much longer to rent out than others and while it is vacant those void periods are costing you money. In addition, leaving your property empty for an extended period of time could attract vandals and invalidate your landlord insurance, so it’s important to check your policy.A decision to end the tenancy is very much a personal judgement on your part as a landlord. That will depend on the local market and whether or not you’re willing to take a risk. It’s also perhaps fair to say that you are unlikely to develop a lasting relationship with any tenant you’ve filed a Section 13 notice with. So tread carefully.‍Landlord’s intuition and rent increases – knowing how far to goThere has been a sharp rise in the number of rent increases since the higher mortgage rates came in. That’s led to a landscape in which landlords are often vilified in the media, but the truth is they are just trying to make a fair and honest living.Knowing how and when to increase the rent without upsetting that landlord/tenant relationship and weighing up the wellbeing and the happiness of your tenants with your own bottom line is a delicate balancing act to pull off. But it’s one that will be that much easier to achieve if you are aware of the limits of the law and (perhaps more importantly) transparent about it.How will the rental reforms affect rent increases?The Renters’ Rights Bill will end the use of rent review clauses, as the Bill is aimed at "preventing tenants being locked into automatic rent increases that are vague or may not reflect changes in the market price" and it says that "any attempts to evict tenants through unjustifiable rent increases are unacceptable".Under the Bill rent increases will be limited to once per year in line with the market rates, which is like the current Section 13 rules. The minimum notice landlords must provide of any change in rent will be doubled, from one month to two months’. Read more about this in the article, Renters’ Rights Bill: Are tenants being given more power to challenge rent rises?Here are some important points to remember about the changes brought about by the Renter’s Rights Bill, though at the time of writing (February 2025), these have not yet become law, so there may be some minor changes.All tenancies will be periodic with a maximum rent period of one month. These could also be 28 or 14 days for weekly tenancies.All existing tenancies will be converted to periodic ones on the “Commencement Day” of the new law, likely sometime in spring / summer 2025. Monthly rent paid tenancies won’t be a problem but quarterly, six monthly or annual rent periods will need to change. This will affect most student landlords. Any clauses in the existing agreement which don’t align with the Renters’ Rights legislation such as rent review clauses will become null and void, though the rest will still be valid.When you advertise a new tenancy, you must state the rent (at or below the market level) in any advertisement. The new anti-bidding rule means the rent cannot be increased above the advertised amount at the start of the tenancy. There will be a £7,000 fine for anyone caught abusing this rule.Rent deposits and rent payments in advance cannot be for more than the first month’s rent. This again may be problematic for student landlords, though there’s nothing to stop them agreeing voluntary arrangements, for example to align payments with term times and grant payments.There will no longer be fixed-term tenancies so the only way to increase your rent to market levels will be if a tenant leaves voluntarily or you serve a notice (Section 13 Form 4) during the periodic tenancy.It is important you get good evidence that you have arrived at a correct market rent, or that you keep it below that. Other recently let properties of a similar type in the location or agents’ letters should be sufficient as tenants will be able to challenge your new rent level (free of charge) at the First Teir Property Tribunal.Our overall takeaway on increasing rent? Getting things right at the start of the tenancy is important. Taking the time to talk through the potential for rent increases at the outset, so that the tenant expects this, and making sure this is noted in the tenancy agreement, is very worthwhile. This will make sure your tenants aren’t faced with any nasty surprises, and they are more readily accepting of small but regular increases in rent, every 12 months.In some instances, keeping a good tenant will make you better off in the long run, even when your rent is slightly below the market level. You need to factor-in the trade-off between upsetting your tenants if they feel they need to use the tribunal process, and the re-letting costs if they decide to leave. Re-letting includes a lot of extra work and expense: marketing the rental, agents fees, preparing the property to let, and your own time, alongside the peace of mind gained from having a tenant you know and trust.It’s all about staying informed and using your landlord’s intuition – knowing your tenants, knowing your properties, knowing the market, knowing the rules and not letting rents get too far below market levels.