Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/private_renting/options_when_your_fixed_term_tenancy_ends
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Fri Aug 08 2025
---

Private tenancies often start as fixed term assured shorthold tenancies. You have 3 options when your fixed term ends:sign a new agreement for a new fixed term let your tenancy become a rolling or periodic tenancyleave the tenancy Your tenancy usually ends if you leave by the last day of the fixed term. But some contracts say you have to give notice. Check your tenancy agreement. Joint tenanciesIt's usually easier if everyone agrees to leave or stay.A joint tenancy continues if at least one joint tenant stays after the fixed term ends. Make sure they sign a new agreement for a new tenancy. If they do not, you could be responsible for rent even if you move out.Find out what to do if you want to leave but others want to stay.If your landlord contacts youYour landlord cannot:make you sign a new agreement  make you leave without taking the 3 steps for evictionRenewal agreementsA renewal agreement is a new contract. It is usually for another fixed term. Make sure you read the whole agreement, even if your landlord says it is the same as your first one.Check important things like:rent length of the fixed termTalk with the landlord if you are not happy with anything.After you sign the new agreementYou and your landlord must both agree if you want to change anything or cancel the agreement.Unless there's a break clause, you cannot give notice to leave during the fixed term. Your landlord cannot evict you with a section 21 eviction notice.You cannot be charged a fee for a renewal agreement even if your agreement says you can.Rolling or periodic tenanciesA periodic tenancy has no end date.Your tenancy becomes periodic if you:stay after your fixed term do not sign a new agreementA joint tenancy becomes periodic if any joint tenants stay on, unless there's a new agreement.You pay your rent as usual and your agreement stays the same.Your landlord can only increase the rent if you agree or by giving you a section 13 rent increase notice.You usually end a periodic tenancy by giving your landlord 1 month's notice. Leaving when your fixed term endsTenancies usually end if you leave by the last day of the fixed term.Some contracts become periodic tenancies unless you give notice to leave.Check your contract before the fixed term ends to see:if you have to give noticehow much notice to giveLeaving before your fixed term endsYou could end your fixed term tenancy early if:your agreement has a break clauseyour landlord agrees that you can end the tenancy early