Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/repairs/revenge_eviction_if_you_ask_for_repairs
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Fri Jul 25 2025
---

Video: Will my landlord evict me if I complain? Our adviser talks about revenge eviction and what to do about bad conditions in your home. [Video length: 1 minute]Which tenants are at risk of revenge eviction?You are at risk of revenge eviction if you have an assured shorthold tenancy (AST).This is because your landlord does not need a reason to evict you with a section 21 notice. But you could have a defence in some situations.Renters' Rights Act changesThe Renters' Rights Act should end revenge evictions and other 'no fault' evictions.Changes are not expected to happen until 2026. For now, your rights are the same.See Renters' Rights Bill: changes for private tenants.Could you be protected from revenge eviction?You cannot be evicted with a section 21 notice if it is not valid.The notice is not valid if you complain to the council about repairs needed, and they give your landlord an:improvement noticeemergency works notice This applies to any section 21 notice given after you first complain to your landlord until 6 months after the council's notice.The council send you a copy of an improvement notice or emergency works notice.Sometimes the council take no action or less formal action against your landlord. In this situation, your landlord might still use the section 21 to evict you.A section 21 might not be valid for other reasons. Even if the notice is valid, eviction takes a few months.Stop a revenge evictionIf your section 21 notice is not valid, you can:write to your landlordask your council for helptell the court if the notice is not valid1. Write to your landlordCopy our letter template into an email to your landlord:You can also send the letter as an email attachment or by post:Word template: Revenge eviction section 21 not valid (docx 23kb)OpenDocument template: Revenge eviction section 21 not valid (odt 9kb)2. Ask your council for helpThe private rented housing team can speak to your landlord for you.You can also speak to your council's homeless team. They should:check if your section 21 notice is validspeak to your landlord and the private rented housing team help with advice and a personal housing plan if your notice is valid3. Tell the court if the notice is not validYour landlord needs to apply to court if they want to evict you.You can tell the court if:you are protected from revenge evictionthe notice is not valid for another reason Return your defence form. Send a copy of the council's notice back to the court with your defence form. Ask for a hearing if your landlord uses the accelerated procedure. You could be evicted with a different noticeYou are only protected from revenge eviction if the landlord uses a section 21.Assured shorthold tenants can also be evicted with a section 8 notice.Your landlord needs a reason to use a section 8, like rent arrears. You can often challenge a section 8 notice in court.