Source URL: https://www.depositprotection.com/learning-centre/landlord-resources/six-tips-for-landlords-preparing-for-a-student-tenancy/
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
---

Will students soon be moving into your property? Starting off on the right foot can help you avoid problems down the line and help both you and your tenant have a successful tenancy.
Helping your tenants understand their obligations and documenting the condition of the property helps ensure everyone is on the same page, whilst gathering essential evidence should you need to make a claim at the end of the tenancy.
Follow the tips below to prepare yourself for a successful student tenancy.


1. Make sure your tenants know their obligations
Your new tenants may not be familiar with the details of the tenancy agreement they signed to secure the property, and many may be first time renters. Help them with a reminder of the key obligations they need to observe, such as rent payments, keeping the property clean, or promptly notifying you of any problems that arise during the tenancy.

2. Put everything in writing at the start
The check-in report is one of the most important pieces of evidence you can gather. It’s vital information if you enter a deposit dispute, and more importantly it can help you avoid disputes altogether. It should be completed at the very start of a tenancy and list everything that’s already in the property, including the condition of the carpet, walls, furniture and garden.

3. Stick to the facts
Be detailed and thorough but most of all, be factual and honest. The report should include information about the age and condition of items and be objective. Using a third-party inventory service is an easy way to create a strong, impartial check-in report.

4. Take Photos
Good quality digital images are great evidence of the condition of the property at check-in, and a helpful resource at the end of the tenancy, when compiling the check-out report or in a dispute. Images should be clear and in colour. Make sure the image files are date-stamped to prove they were taken on the check-in date.

5. Get signatures
A check-in report that’s been signed by all parties carries more weight as evidence. It shows that everyone agrees with the description of the property and that it’s not just one person’s opinion. Give your tenants a copy of the report and provide any supporting images. Let them have the chance to read, consider and sign the report. Keep copies of everything.

6. Share our handy tenancy tips with your tenants
Moving into a new house and everything that comes with it can be a challenging time for your tenants. It can be difficult to remember everything they’re told as they go through the various stages of starting a tenancy. That’s why we’ve created a handy infographic that you can send to your tenants to remind them of some key responsibilities whilst living in your property. You can email it to them or print it out along with the tenancy agreement or Prescribed Information.
Download Infographic


Found this helpful? Check out this article: Some obligations landlords should know about.