Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/repairs/complain_to_environmental_health_about_private_rented_housing
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Thu Jun 08 2023
---

Environmental health is part of your local council. They look into serious repair problems that affect your health or put you at risk.

You might want to complain to the council if your landlord or letting agent ignore you when you report repair problems or do not fix things in a reasonable time.

Environmental health can tell your landlord to do repairs or give your landlord a legal notice to make them fix things.

Tell your landlord about the problem. You need to do this before you contact the council.

Make sure you keep evidence of conversations, messages or emails, and how bad the problem is, for example photos or reports from surveyors.

Find out how to report repair problems.

Contact the private rented housing team. Most councils have a private rented housing team. They are usually your first point of contact as a tenant. They can speak to your landlord if you give them permission. They can refer you to environmental health if the problem is serious. You can usually find contact details in the housing section of the council's website.

Keep records of your contact. Councils can be slow to respond. Keep trying. Ask them about timings and what their next steps will be. Get the name of anyone you speak to on the phone.

The council should inspect serious problems. They will usually tell your landlord if they plan to visit. They might visit more than once. Sometimes they will send someone to look at the situation before they get a specialist to do an environmental health inspection.

Use our template to ask for an inspection. Copy our sample text into an email. You can also send the template as an attachment or by post.

Actions the council might take. Only some actions will protect you against section 21 eviction.

Notices that protect against section 21 eviction. The council could give your landlord an improvement notice or an emergency remedial action notice. An improvement notice tells your landlord how to fix things and gives them a deadline to do it. The council will usually only give an emergency remedial action notice if you or someone who lives with you is very seriously at risk of harm. The council must give you a copy of the notice within 7 days.

Other actions the council can take. The council could give your landlord a hazard awareness notice, contact your landlord to talk about the problem, or take no action if they do not think the problem is serious. You are not be protected from section 21 eviction in these situations. But your section 21 notice might not be valid for other reasons.

Complain if the council does not visit or act. Ask for a copy of their housing enforcement policy and complaints process. Check they have followed their own policy. If not, use their complaints process.

Complain to the ombudsman. You can complain to the Local Government & Social Care Ombudsman if you've already complained to the council about their actions or if you're not happy with the council's final response. Tell the ombudsman if the council did not follow their housing enforcement policy or complaints process. You can also contact your local councillor or MP.