Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/eviction/section_21_eviction/help_from_your_council
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Mon Jul 21 2025
---

You can make a homeless application as soon as you get a section 21 notice. The council must try to stop you becoming homeless if: your notice is valid; it ends in less than 8 weeks; and you meet immigration conditions. The council might help find you somewhere else to live if you cannot stay in your home.

The council will check your notice.
Your landlord can only evict you with a valid notice. Some landlords make mistakes with eviction notices. Bad landlords and agents give notices with the wrong dates to try and make you leave early.

If your notice is valid.
A housing officer will usually try to talk your landlord to find out: why you were given notice, what the landlord plans to do, and if the eviction can be stopped.

If your notice is not valid.
The council might say your landlord has to give you a valid notice before they can help you. But they should look at other things that could mean you cannot stay in your home. Tell the council if, for example: you cannot afford the rent; your home is damp or needs serious repairs; your home is overcrowded; or your landlord or agent harasses you or threatens illegal eviction.

Help to stay in your home.
The council could help with: a grant or loan to clear rent arrears, or discretionary housing payments (DHP) to help with rent.

If you have a disability or support needs.
You may need help to find a certain type of home. For example, an adapted property or supported housing. The council should also decide if you have a priority need for housing. This means the council must provide suitable housing if you become homeless. You might need to show proof like a letter from your doctor. The council should help to find you a suitable home before you have to leave where you are now. They should not tell you they cannot help until the eviction date.

If you cannot stay in your home.
The council might say you need to wait for bailiffs to evict you unless you are at risk of harm. Tell them if you do not think you can stay. For example, if: there are repairs problems that make it unsafe; the cost of eviction through the court would cause you serious money problems; or you cannot afford rent without cutting back on food or other essentials.

Do not give up your tenancy if you have nowhere to go.
The council could decide you're intentionally homeless if you leave when they think you could stay. You can remind your housing officer of the homelessness code of guidance if you qualify for emergency housing. Tell them to read paragraphs 6.29-6.38. You could get legal help if the council makes you wait for the bailiffs.

Help if your landlord starts court action.
The council should: review your personal housing plan, and keep in contact with you and the landlord.

You may have to pay the costs of court action.