Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/private_renting/landlord_agent_discrimination
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Fri May 23 2025
---

Social media and online forums can be a good place to get offers of viewings or rooms, find friendly flatmates or landlords, and get tips and advice from other renters facing discrimination.

Adverts might say things like 'POC house share', 'LGBTQ+ friendly', 'trans friendly house', 'queer household' or 'allies only'. You could try these Facebook groups: POC Housing for London, Homes for Queers.

Report rogue landlords and agents in London.

The London Assembly website lets you report a rogue landlord or agent and check if a landlord or agent has been fined or prosecuted for housing offences. The checker does not tell you if the landlord or agent has broken equality laws, but it does show you who to stay away from.

Get help from a renters union.

It can be easier to stand up to discrimination with support from other people. Renters unions can help challenge things like discrimination and landlord harassment.

Discrimination when renting with children.

'No kids' rental policies are unlawful because they indirectly discriminate against women.

DSS or benefits discrimination.

People on benefits are often turned down for properties they can afford. This is sometimes called 'DSS discrimination' or benefits discrimination.

Race discrimination and right to rent checks.

Right to rent checks can lead to race discrimination. Landlords have to check immigration status but they must not break equality laws, for example, by treating you differently or unfairly based on race, skin colour or ethnic group, how long you have lived in the UK, your accent or English language skills, your nationality or where you were born.

Complain to a letting agent redress scheme.

All agents and property management companies must belong to one of these schemes: the Property Ombudsman (TPO) or the Property Redress Scheme (PRS). The agent must display which scheme they belong to in their offices and on their website.

The schemes are independent. They can look at complaints about the agent. You have to write to the agent to complain first, and wait for a reply.

Complain to a redress scheme if the agent does not reply, or you're not happy with what they say. It takes the scheme a few months to look into the complaint.

Equality law and discrimination.

It is against the law for landlords or letting agents to refuse to rent to you or treat you unfairly based on sex, race, disability, religion or beliefs, sexual orientation, gender reassignment, pregnancy or maternity. These are the legal terms in the Equality Act 2010. They are called 'protected characteristics'.

Race includes skin colour, ethnic group or background, citizenship or nationality.

Trans people are protected at any stage of transition. You do not need to be taking hormones, have surgery, or have a gender recognition certificate.

The Equality and Human Rights Commission has more on the legal terms and their meaning.