Source URL: https://www.depositprotection.com/resources/avoiding-fraud
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
---

Be alert, be aware.

Fraudsters and scams are an unfortunate part of today's world, constantly changing tactics in an attempt to steal information from the unsuspecting or by catching people off guard. Tenants, landlords and letting agents can all be targeted, so it's important to make sure deposit protection information is up-to-date, and to be aware of potential signs of fraudulent activity.

At The DPS, we continually monitor the use of our service to identify red flags and inform and protect our customers. If you think a situation seems off — or are unsure — contact us first on 0330 303 0030. It's always better to be safe than sorry.

It's important to make sure deposit information is accurately recorded up front. Here are some deposit protection details to keep in mind to make sure information stays safe and up-to-date.

For tenants

Tenants should always ensure their email address is listed on their deposit when it's first protected, and that the information is kept current.

We never ask a tenant to make a payment directly to us. If they're told to make a deposit to The DPS, this is a fraudulent attempt to obtain their personal information, including bank account details.

Tenants should:

Only make a deposit payment to the letting agency or landlord, and we advise that wherever possible they inspect the property/room in person before doing so.

Always receive a deposit receipt showing they've made the payment.

Make sure the assured shorthold tenancy agreement they're provided lists their contact details.

Know where their deposit is registered (The DPS information is included on the Prescribed Information they receive from the letting agent or landlord).

Receive a deposit certificate from the landlord or letting agent, showing proof of the deposit protection.

Follow up with The DPS when their deposit is first protected and throughout their tenancy.

Look out for attempts to pass off fake or edited deposit certificates in instances where a landlord/agent has protected a deposit late.

For tenants, landlords and letting agents

Ensure login details are kept safe and not provided to anyone else.

Be wary of emails claiming to be from The DPS. Telltale signs can include asking for information that's already been provided, undue pressure/persistence to take action of some kind, emails with poor grammar and misspellings.

Distrust calls claiming to be from The DPS. We never make outbound calls, so any alleging to be from us are fraudulent.

Contact The DPS for any questions or assistance needed (in particular for tenants, so as to avoid a landlord or letting agent potentially logging into their account unauthorised).

Protecting tenants' money

For further peace of mind, tenants can check if the landlord or agent is a member of an industry body such as the Residential Landlords Association (RLA), the National Landlords Scheme (NLA), the Association of Residential Letting Agents (ARLA), or the National Approved Letting Scheme (NALS). Membership of these schemes indicates that a letting agent/landlord is genuine and committed to improving standards in the private rented sector. Tenants can also check if the agent or landlord operates a client money protection scheme. The Safeagent mark is an industry accreditation that shows an agent uses client money protection, which can also give tenants additional reassurance about the organization or person they're dealing with.