Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/repairs/gas_safety_in_rented_homes
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Thu Oct 01 2015
---

Find out more from the NHS about signs of carbon monoxide poisoning. For information on gas safety, call the free Gas Safety Advice Line on 0800 300 363.

Your landlord's responsibilities
Your landlord must make sure that the gas supply and appliances they have provided are: in a safe condition, fitted or repaired by a Gas Safe registered engineer, checked every 12 months by a Gas Safe registered engineer.

This includes pipework, cookers, boilers, fires and water heaters.

These rules apply to private, council and housing association landlords.

Your responsibilities
You are responsible for any gas appliances that you own. Your landlord is usually responsible for any flues, pipework or chimneys they are connected to. When a Gas Safe engineer checks the appliances owned by your landlord, you can ask them to check your appliances, but you may have to pay for this.

Yearly gas safety checks
Your landlord must arrange a gas safety check every 12 months.

They could book the engineer's visit up to 2 months before the check is due. If your landlord does this, it does not change the date that the next check is due.

You should get reasonable notice of when a check is due. You can ask that it's at a convenient time. You do not have to pay for a gas safety check.

Who can do a gas safety check
The check must be done by a registered Gas Safe engineer. Ask to see their Gas Safe ID card when they visit.

The engineer must make safe serious problems with any of the gas installations in your home. They can: disconnect faulty equipment, arrange for your gas supply to be cut off.

Ask for a gas safety check if it's overdue
Copy our sample text into an email to your landlord or letting agent.

Gas safety certificates
A Gas Safe registered engineer gives your landlord a gas safety record after inspecting your home. This is often called a gas safety certificate.

If the record shows there are problems that affect gas safety, the landlord must get the problems repaired.

Your landlord must give you a copy of the latest gas safety record both: before you move in, within 28 days of each yearly gas safety check.

Ask for a gas safety record
Copy our sample text into an email to your landlord.

Section 21 notices
Your landlord cannot usually give you a valid section 21 eviction notice unless they have given you a copy of the latest gas safety record first.

This applies to assured shorthold tenancies that started or were renewed on or after 1 October 2015.

Carbon monoxide and smoke alarms
Councils, housing associations and private landlords must: provide smoke alarms on each floor of your home, install carbon monoxide alarms in rooms with appliances that burn fuel, for example, a gas boiler or a wood burning stove.

Carbon monoxide alarms are not needed in rooms with only a gas cooker.

Your landlord must check that the alarms are working on the first day of your tenancy.

You should test the alarms monthly. If they do not work you should replace the batteries.

Tell your landlord if you cannot replace the batteries or if the alarms still do not work. Your landlord must repair or replace faulty alarms.

Complain to your council if a private landlord will not fit or fix alarms.

How to complain about gas safety
You can complain to the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) if your landlord will not carry out gas safety checks.

The HSE can prosecute landlords who do not meet their gas safety responsibilities. They are unlikely to be able to deal with every complaint they receive.

If you rent from a private landlord you could complain to the council's environmental health team.