Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/private_renting/get_help_with_rent
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Fri Aug 29 2025
---

You could get help with: paying rent to a private landlord, the costs of starting a new tenancy. For example, rent in advance or a deposit.

Universal credit
You could get universal credit (UC) if you have a low income. It has a housing element to help with rent. UC is paid by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). You normally wait at least 5 weeks for your first payment. You could get a UC advance while you wait. This is a DWP loan that you have to pay back. Your UC payments are lower while you pay it back.

Housing benefit
You can only apply for housing benefit to help with rent if either: you are pension age, or you live in a hostel, refuge or some supported or temporary housing. Housing benefit is paid by your local council. You could also get UC to help with your other living costs if you are working age. You could get pension credit if you are pension age.

Discretionary housing payments (DHPs)
DHPs are extra money from your council to help with rent. You do not have to pay DHPs back. They do not affect your other benefits. You need to get the universal credit housing element or housing benefit to apply for DHPs.

Household support fund
You could get help with other living costs from your council's household support fund. This can help free up more of your other income for rent. The household support fund can help with things like: energy bills, water bills, and food. Ask your council about help from the scheme.

Grants from charities
Some charities have grants if you are struggling. You do not have to pay these back.

Avoid payday loans and doorstep lenders
These types of loans are expensive and often make your debt worse. Doorstep lenders must be regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). It's illegal for someone who is not FCA regulated to charge you for borrowing money. They are known as 'loan sharks'. StepChange debt charity has advice on: payday loans, doorstep lending, and illegal loan sharks.