Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/homelessness/help_if_youre_homeless_ex_prisoners
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Tue Jul 22 2025
---

The prison or probation service must refer you to a council's homeless team if you're homeless now or likely to be homeless in the next 8 weeks, being released in the next 8 weeks with nowhere suitable to stay, or staying in probation or bail accommodation with nowhere to go next. They need your permission to do this. You can also ask the council for homeless help yourself. This is called making a homeless application.

You need somewhere to stay before you can be released on bail or an electronic tag. Court or prison staff may refer you to the Community Accommodation Service (CAS) run by the charity NACRO if you have nowhere suitable to live.

Ask the prison to refer you to a council homeless team 8 weeks before your release. The council must look at your housing needs and give you a personal housing plan. The homeless team should speak to people who are supporting you. For example, probation, youth offending team or drug and alcohol services.

You can ask any council for help but you might be referred to a different council if you have a local connection there. You could have a local connection if you have, for example: close family or work in the area, lived in the area for 3 out of the last 5 years, or lived in the area for 6 out of the last 12 months. Being in prison does not count as a local connection.

Not everyone gets emergency housing when they make a homeless application. The council must provide emergency housing if they think you may be homeless, have a priority need, and meet the immigration conditions.

You always have a priority need if you're homeless because of domestic abuse, a care leaver under 21, or pregnant or have dependent children with you.

You might also have a priority need for other reasons, for example because of a serious physical or mental health condition. The council should look at how long you spent in prison and when you were released, and if you have found and kept a home since you left prison.

Probation teams may be able to refer you to hostels, supported housing or private landlords. If you're released on licence, you might not be able to live in certain areas or you might have to stay in 'approved premises'.

On the day of release, most prisoners get a travel warrant or tickets and an £89.52 cash payment, often called a subsistence payment. You must have spent at least 2 weeks as a sentenced prisoner to get these. Prison governors can also make a discretionary payment of up to £50 direct to a housing provider if this will give you somewhere to stay on release.

You may need to apply for universal credit when you're released from prison to help with living costs. Universal credit includes a housing element to help with rent. If you move in with a partner who gets benefits, you need to claim benefits as a couple. You will probably have to claim housing benefit to help with rent if you stay in a hostel, supported or temporary housing on release. You can still get universal credit to help with other living costs.

You may need to open a bank account so you have somewhere to get your wages and benefits paid into.