Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/eviction/help_from_the_council_with_harassment_and_illegal_eviction
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Mon Apr 22 2024
---

Tell the council if your landlord harasses you or threatens you with illegal eviction. The council might have to give you homeless help if it's not safe for you to stay where you are.

The council might: talk to your landlord about your rights, prosecute your landlord in serious cases, tell your landlord that they are breaking the law, and help you get back into your home if you've been illegally evicted.

What to do before you contact the council

Get information together before you contact your council if you can.

Be ready to tell them: how your landlord is harassing you, times and dates of unwanted visits, and your landlord’s contact details. It will be easier for the council to take action against your landlord if you have this information. Find out about how to keep a record of harassment.

Contact the council

Every council has a team that deals with harassment and illegal eviction. The team could be called something like: environmental health team, private rented housing team, or tenancy relations officer or team. Their contact details should be on your council's website.

In London, you can report a rogue landlord or agent on the London Assembly website. Your local council can use these details for investigation if you give permission.

Phone the council

Say you need help because your landlord is harassing you or threatening to illegally evict you.

Make a note of: who you speak to, what you discuss, the time and date, the number you've called, and what your next steps should be.

Use an online form to contact the council

Some councils only let you contact them with an online form. Make sure you mention: your landlord’s actions, what specific help you want, why you’re at risk of illegal eviction or harassment, and how often and when the harassment has happened.

Keep a record of the date and time you sent the form and any reference number you get.

Use our letter template

Copy the template into an email to your council. You can also send it as an email attachment or by post.

Houses in multiple occupation (HMOs)

Make sure you tell your council if you live in an HMO. Most HMOs must be licensed by the council. Landlord harassment breaks HMO rules. Your landlord might lose their HMO licence.

If you cannot get through to your council

It can be hard to get through to your council. Keep trying.

It is a good idea to: try different numbers on your council website, call your council at different times of the day, get in touch with your local councillor, send follow up emails, and contact your local MP.

If you're facing homelessness

Contact your council's homeless team if you cannot stay in or return to your home because of harassment.