Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/homelessness/help_if_youre_homeless_veterans
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Mon Jan 13 2025
---

If you're at risk of homelessness or rough sleeping, you can get help finding a place to stay from: Veterans Aid on 0800 012 6867, Royal British Legion on 0808 802 8080, Op Fortitude on 0800 952 0774, and Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen and Families Association (SSAFA) on 0800 260 6767.

These housing associations have longer term housing: Stoll provides housing and help for veterans, and Haig Housing offers homes for the veteran community.

You can get help with a deposit or rent in advance for private renting.

6 months before you leave the forces, the Ministry of Defence (MOD) gives you a Certificate of Cessation of Entitlement. You can ask the council for help with housing if you could be homeless. Make sure you show them your certificate. The council should accept the date in the certificate as the date you will be homeless from if you have nowhere to move to.

8 weeks before the date in the certificate the council must look into your housing needs and give you a personal housing plan. This sets out the steps that you and the council follow to help you find somewhere to live.

You should get emergency housing if the council thinks you are in priority need. You can also find out who can get longer term housing.

You're in priority need for housing if you have dependent children who live with you, are pregnant or have a pregnant partner who you live with, or are under 21 and spent time in care when you were 16 or 17. You also have a priority need if you are vulnerable. Tell the council if you have a disability or other serious health problems or have struggled to find somewhere to live since leaving the forces. Show the council your medical history release form if you have one.

You could apply for a council or housing association home. It can take a long time to get this type of housing. You can apply to get on any council's housing register if you are or were in the armed forces or have to leave armed forces housing because of a relationship breakdown.

You must get extra priority on the waiting list if you're homeless or about to be homeless and either you served in the regular armed forces, or you're still in the regular or reserve forces and are seriously injured, ill or disabled because of your service. You should also get extra priority on the waiting list if you have to move because of a medical condition or leave service family accommodation (SFA) because your husband, wife or civil partner died in service.

You could get the universal credit housing element to help with rent. You apply for housing benefit if you stay in a hostel or other supported or temporary housing. You can also find out where to get grants and emergency help with food and other costs.