Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/tenancy_deposits/how_to_get_your_deposit_back
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Wed Jul 17 2024
---

Take these steps in the weeks before you move out. Doing these things could help you get your deposit back on time.

Check if you need to give notice. Many tenancies end on the last day of a fixed term if all the tenants move out. You might have to give your landlord notice that you are leaving if you have a rolling periodic tenancy or a term in your agreement says you have to give notice.

Even if you do not need to give a legal notice, you should tell your landlord the date you plan to leave and ask when you will get your deposit back. Discuss this by email or letter. Keep the emails or messages they send back. Always agree your tenancy end date with your landlord in writing. This means you and your landlord know the date when you will stop paying rent and when you should get your deposit back.

Check how your deposit is protected. Most private renters have an assured shorthold tenancy (AST). With this tenancy type your landlord or agent must protect your deposit with a scheme and give you written information about the scheme they have used. There are 3 deposit protection scheme providers and each one has a custodial scheme, where the scheme holds the money, and an insurance scheme, where the landlord or agent holds the money. Check which type of scheme your landlord has used. All schemes have a free dispute service if your landlord makes unfair deductions.

If you have a new landlord or agent your deposit should still be protected.

Check your tenancy agreement. See if your agreement says anything about your landlord keeping your deposit. Try to do what the agreement says about looking after the property.

Unfair terms are things in your agreement which are not fair and which cannot be enforced. This means your landlord or agent cannot make you do them.

Your landlord or agent should have done an inventory with you when your tenancy started. An inventory is a list of fixtures, fittings and furnishings in each room. For example: furniture and appliances, flooring, curtains and walls, and kitchen and bathroom fittings. The inventory should say the age of the items, the condition they were in and how clean they were. It should be an accurate record of the property's condition when you moved in.