Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/eviction/how_to_deal_with_rent_arrears
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Wed Nov 27 2024
---

Rent is one of your most important monthly payments. If you pay late or miss payments, it's called being in rent arrears.

Always try to contact your landlord or letting agent about missed rent payments. If you're not sure what to say, just let them know: you will pay what you owe as soon as you can, and you are getting advice and taking steps to deal with the arrears.

You can get a benefits check for free with an online calculator or through a helpline. You could get money that you did not know about.

Discretionary housing payments (DHPs) are extra money to help with rent. You can apply for DHPs from your local council if you get universal credit or housing benefit. You have to give information about your income and spending when you apply.

You could get more help to pay rent, other living costs or debts. A grant or interest free loan could help if you need to pay off rent arrears quickly. Grants are best because they are extra money that you do not have to pay back. Some councils give money from their homeless prevention fund. For example, if you're at risk of eviction and this would help you stay in your home. Find out about emergency grants and loans and help with energy costs and debts.

These websites have tools or templates and are a good place to start:

Money Helper budget planner: Record your spending. Get tips on getting out of debt or starting to save.

National Debtline advice tool: Create an account. It helps you work out a budget and gives you debt solutions.

StepChange budget templates: Excel spreadsheet or PDF to download and print out. These resources are not accessible for people using screen readers.

You need information about your income and spending to use these tools. If most of your money goes through your bank account, a lot of this information is on your statements.

Shelter adviser Hayden explains how to make a repayment plan for rent arrears.

You can make a repayment offer if your budget shows that you can afford to pay your normal monthly rent and an extra amount each month towards the arrears.

Get debt advice if you have other unpaid bills or debts, you cannot see how to pay off your arrears, your budget shows you cannot afford your rent, it's hard for you to take any of the other steps without help, or you are being evicted for rent arrears.

A debt adviser can talk to you about breathing space. This scheme pauses debt recovery for up to 60 days while you get debt advice. It can also pause the eviction process if your landlord is evicting you for rent arrears.

Deal with an eviction notice.