Source URL: https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/repairs/landlord_and_tenant_responsibilities_for_repairs
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
Last Modified: Wed May 22 2024
---

Your landlord is responsible for most repairs in your home. As a tenant, you are responsible for looking after your home, reporting repairs or damp and letting the landlord or contractors in to inspect the property or fix problems.

Private landlords, housing associations and councils must sort out repairs to: electrical wiring, gas pipes and boilers, heating and hot water, ventilation and chimneys, sinks, baths and toilets, plumbing and drains, internal and external walls, stairs and bannisters, doors and windows, and the roof.

Your landlord is always responsible for these repairs even if your tenancy agreement does not say this. They are sometimes called 'section 11 repairs' because they come from section 11 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1985.

If you live in a flat, the freeholder who owns the building may be responsible for common parts, like lifts and stairways, and the structure and exterior of the whole property. You should tell your landlord or agent about problems so they can report them to the freeholder or management company.

Your tenancy agreement might give you extra repair rights. For example, it could say that the landlord is responsible for repairing faulty appliances such as a fridge or washing machine.

Your landlord must carry out repairs within a reasonable period of time. Timescales depend on how serious the problem is. Your landlord should also redecorate if needed once the problem is fixed.

Your landlord should make sure that your home is safe and free from any hazards. It should be fit to live in throughout your tenancy.

Your landlord must look for the causes of damp and deal with it if it's caused by disrepair.

You must use your home in a ‘tenant like manner’. This means looking after your home, keeping gardens or outside areas in a reasonable state, making sure your home is well ventilated to help avoid condensation, and doing small jobs likes changing light bulbs or smoke alarm batteries.

You do not have to leave your home in a better condition than when you moved in. You're not responsible for normal wear and tear in your home.

You must allow access to your home at reasonable times if the landlord or someone acting for them wants to inspect the condition of the property. You must get at least 24 hours' written notice of an inspection. If the time is not convenient you can suggest a better time.

Report any repairs to your landlord as soon as possible.

You're responsible for fixing appliances or furniture you own and damage caused by you, your family or your guests. You might have to pay for damage you cause, even if your landlord has to fix it. For example, your landlord might ask you to pay for things like blocked drains or toilets if you did not take reasonable care to keep them unblocked.