Source URL: https://www.depositprotection.com/news-insights/minimise-time-spent-on-student-end-of-tenancies-with-surprisingly-easy-deposit-protection
Scrape Date: 28 September 2025
---

It’s the end of the university year and most students are preparing to leave their accommodations. It’s a busy time of year for many landlords and letting agents, requiring lots of deposit protection administration, both returning deposits to students, and in some cases, handling disputes.

Our surprisingly easy deposit protection can help you reduce the amount of time spent administering and repaying deposits.

Repay deposits quickly. Our simple online service allows you to repay deposits or make a claim with a minimum of fuss. Simply log in to your account, select the deposit you want to repay and start the process.

New process speeds up Statutory Declarations. Is a tenant not responding to your deposit claim? We've simplified our Statutory Declaration process.

Avoid deposit disputes to minimise your admin time. Deposit disputes are the most time-consuming aspect of deposit protection, and avoiding them can save you time. Follow the guidance below to give yourself and your tenants the best chance of a fair and amicable end to the tenancy.

Do a full check-out inspection. Assess the condition of the property against the original inventory. Note any damage in a clear, concise manner.

Ask tenants to attend check-outs. Give tenants the opportunity to attend the check-out and provide them with the chance to discuss and agree any findings.

Remind the tenant to sign the check-out documents. Make sure you ask the tenant to sign the check-out report if they attend the check-out and send them a copy.

Stay in touch about the check-out report. Be sure you have up-to-date mobile numbers for your tenants to stay in touch throughout the check-out process. Keep copies of all communications, especially if there is a delay or dispute, to demonstrate to an adjudicator the steps taken to reach an agreement.

Take date-stamped images. Date-stamped photographs can help to show damage that might be considered to be beyond what is reasonable wear and tear for the length of the tenancy and can dramatically lessen the chances of a dispute after check-out.

Understand the latest rules on cleaning. You can only ask the tenant to return the property to the same standard of cleanliness it was in when the tenancy started. You can’t force a tenant to pay for cleaning services. However, if it’s not returned in a comparable state, then you can still deduct this amount from the deposit.

Don’t accept deposit money to pay outstanding rent. Student tenants cannot ask for their deposit money to make up any rent shortfall or cover the final month’s payment before moving out.

Maintain neutral language in the event of a dispute or claim. Avoid using emotive language to describe a property’s condition during a claim or dispute. Words such as ‘disgusting’ or ‘squalid’ in any documentation or attached to photos could potentially increase tension during a dispute.

Consider the property’s true condition before making a claim. If you have rented out properties for years to successive tenants, you may not fully recall their original condition or décor so consider the actual wear and tear before starting a claim.

Take pictures of final energy readings. Take time stamped photos of the final gas and electricity meter readings for your records in case of a dispute and forward them to the energy supplier.